Hello, and welcome to the first ever CodePop podcast.
It is my exceptional pleasure today to have Boron, a hacker, a math nerd, an ex-colleague
and a friend.
He is also an author of three books and a functional programming aficionado.
Welcome Boron.
Thank you for the great introduction.
It's a pleasure to be present here at the first CodePop podcast ever, and I'm looking
forward to many more podcasts in the future.
All right, we'd be happy to provide more in the future again.
So let's first talk origins.
How did you get into programming in the first place?
Yes.
So I think it starts usually, as most of us probably, I don't want to generalize a lot,
but I would say for me, it started with video games as usual.
So there were two main drivers in my life, which kind of led me to where I am right now.
I want to believe that those two are the most important.
So one driver is me having access to a computer thanks to my dad, which was also and is still
also working with computers to this day.
So this means even from my youngest ages, I had this access to which I consider a privilege.
And then the other driver is genuine curiosity into things and just trying to understand
how things work and why they work that way and just getting a general sense.
So like I said, it started with video games at this time.
I think the two of the two main drivers, only one of them was present, which is access to
a computer.
The second driver came a bit later.
So I was only, you know, this little kid who was just interested in computers, just seemed
like this magical device that you could do stuff with it.
So there is this game which I remember even to this day.
It's called Crystal Caves from Apogee Software, and it's like this 2D platformer.
And as far as I can remember, this was my first game that I ever started playing on
my x86 machine, I believe it was, some Pentium, at the age of three.
So it's like this little guy that throws out, that fires rockets, has this rocket launcher
that you can use to defeat enemies and whatever.
And I think this is where it all began.
Yeah, that's a common story.
Most of us started off that way.
That's true.
So you did mention a computer.
What was that first computer you used?
I believe it was some, I don't, I don't remember the technical details exactly because I was
just like this little kid who still didn't, you know, just like the curiosity came a bit
later, like I said, and at this point in my life, me being three years old, you're just
like this little kid who sees some graphics on the, on the screen and just like presses
the buttons and something happens.
And this is like the wow moment, moment that you, that you kind of like appreciate a lot.
But at the same time, at that time, I was not really interested into how, what, what,
what is this, what, what, what is this computer?
What, what does it have inside?
Like, what, what are the specs?
And so I, I for sure know it was some 286 or perhaps even 386.
So this was back in 91, 92.
So maybe somebody can correct me if I'm wrong, but I believe it was like 286 at that time.
Right.
So, okay.
How did you actually got into programming?
What was your first programming language?
Yeah, it's a very good question.
I think there was a natural progression from video games to programming.
And the most interesting bit is that I really have not started programming before actually
tackling crackers and trainers.
They were called like that back then.
So a trainer is basically like this software that allows you, like, let's say you're playing
some game that you have like a thousand coins and you need, I don't know, 2000 coins to,
to buy this weapon or whatever.
So a trainer is a, is a, is a special program that what it does is attaches to the game
process and it's modifying the memory values of the, of the game itself.
So you don't have to do any work in the game.
You just like launch this application and suddenly you have like all the money you need
to make the progress in the game.
So this was one of the steps in the progression that, that took place.
So cracking and trainers, you know, like those groups back then, I don't know, Razer, 1911,
Fairlight or whoever they are.
It's combined with chip tunes and all of this stuff, like this blip blop music you listen.
It's what really felt magical to me at the time.
So before starting into programming, I was really interested in, okay, how these trainers
work.
Right.
So I, you know, of course, you know, you cannot understand these things like before you actually
get into programming.
So the first programming language, I would say, as far as I can remember, is quick basic.
And to relate to what I was saying earlier, there was this game, I think it was Monopoly
or something where in quick basic, you just like have the source of the source, the whole
source code of the game.
And what you can do is modify the code and then you actually affect the game and you
can give yourself money or whatever.
So it started with quick basic, but it wasn't like any special kind of building rockets,
rocket ships or whatever.
It was more like, I have this source code, I have this game, I'm just going to give myself
more money.
And, you know, that's, that's how it started all of it.
Nice, nice.
So that's kind of nostalgic for me as well, because we're a similar age.
So what were the games you did use trainers and stuff like that for the most part?
This is on a tangent, but still, I think it's relevant to the story.
Yeah, it's a very good question.
As far as I can remember, the first game that I used a trainer for is StarCraft by Blizzard
Entertainment.
So StarCraft is like this role playing game where you, where you are like this general,
so to say, and you have a lot of units that you can control, but it also has resources
like minerals and gas.
And at some point, you know, and this is so before the, you know, this is before the time
where playing online was even possible where we live, because the Internet was really slow
at the time.
And so I was just going to, you know, play a game against the computer and I'm saying
to myself, OK, the computer beats me and it beats me again and beats me again.
So you don't try to, you know, as a kid, you kind of try to get around the game by not
doing the things that you're supposed to do, but by doing the easiest thing.
So you're not actually learning the game and you don't want to learn the game and become
better at it, but you just want to beat the computer at no cost, at whatever cost.
So I remember this trainer was probably by Rezor1911 and it just gives you infinite minerals
and gas.
And at this point, you just like launch the application and you build like all of your
army with, you know, soldiers, tanks, whatever, and you just like smash the computer.
And this gives, I mean, used to give a sense of accomplishment back then.
But you're really cheating the game.
I mean, it's not how the game is supposed to be played, but it's what got me started.
Yeah.
Another nostalgia point for Rezor1911 and that those guys have like the best chiptunes
ever.
I really love the music of those crackers and stuff.
That was awesome.
So let's shift gears to your professional career or let's get started with your studying
experience.
How did you actually get the diploma before starting up as a professional programmer?
Do you have any formal education?
What's the story there?
Yeah.
So like to continue the natural progression talk, I think, you know, after trainers and
crackers and whatnot, I remember there was this IRC channel on the FNET network.
So FNET was this like crazy network full of hackers and whatnot.
You could find a lot of stuff there.
There were a lot of IRC networks back then, but, you know, like most of them were just
like, for example, UNDERNET was really just for trolling and chilling around.
But FNET was really this educational network that I have to say and admit that I learned
a lot of stuff there.
And like I said, it started with crackers and trainers, but really, so there were these
two channels on FNET.
I don't know if they still exist.
One of them was cracking for newbies, and then the other one was new to cracking.
And you would join this channel and people just talk a lot of random stuff like hexadecimal
codes.
I don't know, WinAPI, functions that you can use to attach to a process, modifying memory,
creating an executable that self-modifies, and all of these sort of tricks.
So I'm like, I don't understand anything of this, you know.
So at this time, I don't remember I still had like the will to start learning programming,
but it was just like this, probably at this time is when genuine curiosity started to
kick in.
So I'm like, okay, I just want to figure out what this is, you know, I want to understand
it.
That's it.
And eventually I want to write a trainer myself.
So these two channels from FNET provided that experience for me, which is, you know, there
are a lot of tutorials by Exilion, I don't remember, Fravia, Ork, there are a lot of
like famous names that I have completely forgotten most of them by now.
But I'm getting to your question, which is, when this happens, I'm like 13 or 14 years
old, right?
So in basic school, and in high school, the educational system here was, you know, you
write this basic program, which is really you just read the book, and you just write
the same contents as it is in the book in the computer, and then something draws.
But that's as far as education went.
And in high school, I think it was more like Microsoft Office packages, you know, learning
how to use a browser.
So I was like already beyond those stuff, because I was, you know, continuously involved
with computers.
So I want to attribute, like the first starting experience to the FNET network, which is learning
how to crack and write trainers.
And then in high school, something happened, which is the teacher, like, you know, she's
teaching other kids, other students, how to use a browser or whatever.
And then she sees me and she notices something probably that I mean, teachers are probably
good at that, trying to see like trying to find who's who is different from the others.
And then she's like, Well, you know, I think you have a very good understanding of computers.
What do you think about that?
And I'm like, Well, you know, I spend most of my time on the computer.
So yeah, probably, I don't know.
So there is this competitive programming that's happening for high school students.
Are you interested in it?
And I'm like, I have no idea what is what it is, you know, I don't know what CP is competitive
programming release.
So I'm like, Yeah, why not?
You know, I'm, she was like something.
So you know, you don't have to attend other classes, you know, this will be your reward
for it.
And I'm like, really?
So?
And she's like, you know, I can go to school and just do computers, yes, that will be the
same thing for like, a couple of weeks.
And I'm like, I don't care what CP is, I don't care about anything.
It's computers just, you know, I'm in it.
And then she's like, Okay, you know, just so she signs me up, she was basically my mentor,
so to say.
And then in this competitive, so this was another highlight of my, you know, natural
progression besides crackers and trainers is when you get to this competitive programming,
it's like this really now when I think of it, it's like this really high pressure kind
of environment where you, you know, you just like sit and compete with other kids.
You know, it's, it's like, you see them, you talk to them, you smile.
But then when all of you sit on the computer, you're like, I want to crush you, you know,
so you're like this egoistic little kid that just wants to be best at everything.
So this is the other, you know, highlight, like I said, where I started to, to learn
how, you know, how to program how to program fast, the tasks were most mostly algorithmic.
So, but it still gave me this sense of, okay, you know, this is what programming is about.
It's, and this is what, you know, you will be doing for the rest of your life.
And I'm like, well, it's high pressure, but I really enjoyed this.
You know, I won several, several prizes.
But regardless of that, it's just that I want to continue doing this.
And you know, and then I actually started, so this is high school, right?
And then after high school, I started working professionally, this is in 2010, for a company
here, which at this time, I don't have like a university degree or whatever, it's just
like borrow with his high school diplomas from, from the competitive programming thing
that was organized.
So I'm like, you know, I need some money.
So it's this period in my life where I needed some money.
And I'm like, you know, I'm just gonna start programming.
And I have a general idea of what programming is.
But you know, when you start working in a company, it's very unlike competitive programming.
And I have to admit, I'm happy for that.
Because I at this age, I don't know if I enjoy high pressure as much as back then.
Yeah, like competitive programming and professional programming are like entirely different sports.
I can easily agree to that.
Yeah.
And so I forgot to also mention one important thing about all of this progression is I'm
leaning towards, you know, your initial question is, most of my stuff is things that I have
learned, you know, self self learning.
But also, there was another big thing, which is also can be attributed to my parents, which
we had an internet cafe for 11 years, or 12 years, something like that.
And it's it was this period, like 99 until 2011, or something like that, where internet
cafes were the thing, you know, and a huge, a huge amount of my knowledge also comes from
there where you just do stuff and break stuff.
And you have like this support from your parents, you know, I don't know, hey, Dad, I broke
the CPU cooler from this computer, you know, oh, okay, at least you tried fixing it.
Here's some money, get a new cooler and you know, assemble it.
And you know, at that time, I didn't feel like it's something you know, that that would
turn later turn out to be useful in my life.
But you really realize that these small things are basically the you know, what what caused
this this large shifts.
And speaking of school, I, I was really bad at most subjects, except for mathematics and
informatics, obviously.
But again, I had this luck from from the competitive program, where all of my grades were sort
of, quote, unquote, fixed.
Because you know, I spent all of my time studying for the for the competitions.
But yeah, university degree came a lot later after after the professional, after I started
started working professionally, cool.
So I know that it's sort of a spoiler, I know you're currently into academia, at least partially.
But yeah, we'll get into that later.
I don't need to drill down into that just now.
So yeah, past that point, we actually, well, I actually had the pleasure of working with
you for a while.
And it was a fun time back then.
What's the most important, or rather the most interesting part of that collaboration that
we had together?
Yes, this is a very good question.
Just going to give an extra context here.
So my first job was really actually working at an, like this outsourcing company that
a lot of random projects come in, like, I don't know, Java, C sharp, I, you know, Python,
I don't know whatever else.
And I've been working there for like three years or something like that.
But like I said, it's like this outsourcing slash corporate culture.
And so the company that you and I worked together is was my second job, actually.
And the way it differed from the first job was that it's a startup, basically.
So really, I had a very good experience there to be, you know, to feel the beauty of working
in a startup.
I have to, I have to tell the listeners that it was my first and my last startup, but regardless
of that, so startups, I think they, so for sure, they drain a lot of energy from you
and you have to be like very enthusiastic and you just have to find some source from
which you drain this energy and you have to be prepared to waste all of your energy in
there.
But the best part of working in a startup was, I would say, the freedom to move fast,
to research, to experiment and do a lot of crazy stuff.
Like I remember one specific collaboration you and I that we had was we used Libaria,
which is a library for torrents, like peer-to-peer data transfer, doesn't have to be only files.
And then so we built like this browser plugin based on the MPAPI.
I think MPAPI was, it's coming from Netscape, the API, but I think it's obsolete by now.
So it died with Flash anyway.
Yeah, it's been sunsetted for sure, at least like six, seven years ago, maybe more.
Yeah.
So, and this MPAPI, you know, you and I are just like sitting in this pub drinking some
beer.
And I remember, you know, you mentioning, hey, you know, we can speed up the MPAPI video
player that you built, that you're building together with another coworker by using, by
integrating Libaria into it and trying to distribute the data that is transferred for
the video and audio to, you know, between different kinds of viewers.
So it's like this small projects that, you know, you have the freedom to, you know, to
experiment with it and something will happen eventually.
But the thing with startups is that most of the times nothing happens and you have to
be very careful with how you, you know, waste your energy there and make sure that, you
know, especially, I don't want to say pay attention to your mental health because I
was very young at that time.
But if I were to work in a startup at this age, I'm 34 now, you know, it would be very
different for me.
Definitely.
Yeah, I can agree to that.
Sort of as a transition question, how would you compare the startup grind culture versus
the place you're currently working at in terms of like how they compare with pressure, speed,
expectations, and so on?
Yes, it's a great question.
So it's, you know, so I'm working for Automattic right now.
I've been there for six years.
It's basically the company behind WordPress, but there are also several other products
like WooCommerce, Tumblr, Word Ads, Jetpack, so all of those things.
And the interesting thing about Automattic is, so I joined there six years ago when it
was, I think I was like employee number 500 something.
And right now, you know, taking, you know, all the people that have left, all the people
that all the new people that have joined, you know, it's around 2000 people right now.
So it definitely grew a lot in this past six years.
It's just, it's a good question because Automattic itself considers internally, it considers
itself as a startup, which is funny.
I would not call it a corporation, but also I would not call it an early startup as well.
I would say somewhere in between in that, right, so you have, you still have the freedom
to like introduce new processes and do changes and make impact, you have this option.
But at the same time, and there is chaos, of course, but at the same time, you're not
strictly controlled or strictly bound by these processes, which most corporations tend to,
you know, get like themselves stuck, you know, so me working in a corporation, what I found
out is that most of the processes that are there are just there for, for the sake of
a process.
And it's just like making things complex.
So and in startups, most of the times you don't even have processes.
So right, Automattic is somewhere in between, I like to think that everybody can make a
change to the process as long as it makes sense, as long as it's debated, and as long
as it can be, you know, justified the decision.
And at the same time, it's the chaos, we try to give, to bring some control to the chaos,
but I, you know, it's not like it's unlike a startup, and it's not like a corporation.
I hope that answers the question.
Yeah, it paints an interesting picture for sure.
I'm going to switch gears to your current job description.
And you're not actually doing much programming these days, are you?
I mean, professionally?
Yes.
Oh, yeah, it's, you know, yeah, I mean, you know, when you start asking questions like
that, it's, it's like very, very hard to give like precise answer, because now we have to
define what programming means.
And I agree with you, the definition of programming for me has quite changed in the past period
for what's happened is so like I said, six years at Automattic, the first four years
were mostly product work, you know, doing some research, working on a product, doing
bug fixes, security fixes, whatever customers give you, you know, user stories, you address
those, you make customers happy.
And so something happened two years ago, where Automattic has this culture of like role switches.
And I'm like, you know, I get pinged by this random person that says, hey, you know, we
have like this role that you might be interested in, maybe not, but we just want to let you
know that it's a thing.
It's basically for you to help us on the hiring part of hiring engineers.
Right?
So I'm like, wait, hiring engineers, what does that mean?
Oh, you know, you, you know, people who apply on Automattic, you will talk to them, you
will work with them, you will evaluate them.
And I'm like, so this is going to take three months.
It's like, you know, like they call it rotation internally.
So three months and I'm like, but wait, you know, I don't know any of these things.
I'm interested in it, but I don't know any of that, any of the things you mentioned.
And the person was like, well, that's the point of the rotation is for us to teach you.
And you know, I'm like, oh, this is getting better for sure.
And so three months, I mean, you know, so I do my, you know, I hand off all the stuff
that I'm working on, documentation, API, finishing all the remaining work.
And then, you know, I'm like, okay, I'm just going to need like a week or two, and then
I can start three months and then I'm back in into my previous team.
Sure.
Sounds like a good idea.
And then what happens is the first few months is where you actually, we have like this.
So like I said, you know, we have like these processes internally that are not strictly
defined, but they have like their own freedom in which, you know, so there was this process
of shadowing and most of the stuff in the first few months was me mostly learning stuff.
So it's not like I really evaluated any candidate or interview or whatever, but it was mostly
me being there shadowing and seeing what the other person does.
And you know, it's like this basically learn by doing or learn by watching and you know,
and you repeat like what monkeys do, for example.
And so I'm like, you know, three months go by and I'm like, oh, you know, it's, you know,
it's a lot of stuff I have absorbed.
And what I do next is I just write like this reflection post.
We have like this internal blog posting mechanism at Automatic, which, you know, depending on
we have a lot of P2s where, you know, one P2 might be related to marketing research
and other to code research, whatever.
So we have a P2 for hiring and then I'm writing like this reflection post.
And as I'm writing it, I figure that, wait, so I learned all of this stuff as to, you
know, what it means to evaluate a candidate, for example, you know, asking questions, asking
the right questions that that was my biggest, my biggest gain, I would say, you know.
And then if you ask this question, what response do you expect?
What information do you give with the very own question that you're asking?
That's one example.
You know, another example is evaluating their, you know, the candidate's research qualities
or communication qualities.
So what does it mean to even communicate?
And you know, it starts a bit getting into this like philosophy around, you know, programming
and like what you said, you know, do less programming, but do more of the stuff that
is about programming.
So right.
You know, you just like take a step back and you go on this meta level that you say, OK,
I'm not going to do programming, but I'm going to do stuff about programming.
And so like three months in the rotation, I did nothing productive here besides me learning.
I want to stay more.
I want to I want to actually apply the stuff that I learned.
So, you know, it's like you buy, I don't know, a shovel and then somebody teaches you how
to use it.
And then you're like, OK, you know, I'm selling this show.
I know how to use it.
And that's it.
But you really want to build a house, right?
So we decide internally that I should extend my rotation to another six months.
And at this time is where you actually get to apply all the quote unquote theoretical
parts that you that you learn and practice is, you know, practice makes perfect.
And this is where I realized, wait, I don't really want to go back to programming.
I want to stay here and I want to be doing this.
This is actually a really good driver for me.
I'm learning a lot of new stuff.
I'm, you know, working with people, working with random people, seeing random solutions,
trying to understand why people arrived with that solution.
What were they thinking when they wrote all of this code?
How could have they done it differently?
So all of these things kind of like, you know, it starts getting closer and closer to the
philosophy.
And to this day, we decided to stop the rotation and do like the full roll switch and yes,
I'm now part of the developer experience at Automatic.
We're still working with hiring, but also other stuff like, you know, tweaking internal
processes, working on tooling, developer mentorship, just started doing that a few weeks ago.
So yeah, I'm definitely still excited about the position and I'm still learning.
And I'm happy to be there.
Glad to hear that.
And that's an awesome transition to my next question, actually.
Currently Devex and DevRel and all of the dev star professions are sort of a hot topic.
To you, what does Devex mean?
How would you describe it in layman's terms, let's say?
Yes.
It's another good question, I would say.
My take of it is, I don't know if I can give a general definition of it, but my take on
it is that Devex, DevRel, whatever you want to call it, is closely tied to the company
culture, right?
So what I mean by this is every company has its own culture that they are trying to follow,
like a mission statement or whatever.
And I used to be very skeptical of those things when I was younger, like, you know, who needs
this BS or whatever.
But there is a lot of value in that, which once you define this, it will dictate most
of the parts that will be happening in your company, right?
So for example, Automatic has this creed, which it's a long creed, but one of the parts
is communication is oxygen.
So it really means that Automatic, given it's a remote and distributed company with people
working from all across the globe and our main tools are Slack and GitHub and Zoom.
So if you cannot communicate, you know, not much can happen.
So back to the question, I think Devex and how it relates actually to hiring, for example,
at Automatic, we pay a lot of attention to how people communicate.
And we also set the expectations and give them context around how we do it at Automatic.
You know, obviously you cannot force a person to communicate this way or do that way or
do this the other way, but we give them information as far, you know, this is how things work
at Automatic.
So this dictates, for example, the hiring process.
And then another part of the creed is I will never stop learning.
So Automatic says something like, you know, we will pay you a lot of money for your self
growth, for whatever.
So by nature, you know, this program of developer mentorship gets born and then it's really
driven by the culture, right?
So I will never stop learning is basically the developer mentorship, which is still under
the umbrella of Devex.
So to give a short answer, I think don't pay attention to a lot, I mean, obviously, no,
it's all about people and about computers, Devex and DevRel, like you wrote on your one
of your blog posts that, you know, developer relations.
But at the same time, if you want to get closer to what it really means to be doing DevRel
is start at the top, which is the company culture, and then, you know, go bottom to
the Atom level, to the unit level, which is basically the programmer and the employees.
And in my understanding, Devex and DevRel, what they do is they sort of bring the culture,
they're like this law enforcement of culture.
I don't want to use the word enforcement, I think it's too harsh of a word, but something
that would give other people, you know, so what happens is usually programmers, they
are like in this everyday cycle where they program, code, test, review, QA, repeat.
It's very easy to forget what company is it you're working for, what are your options
for self growth, all of those stuff.
So I think there needs to be someone there to, like, what got me here to the hiring rotation
is I got pinged.
It was a thing in automatic, but I was so busy with my day-to-day activities that I'm
like, you know, I don't know what else, you know, what options automatic gives.
So like DevEx, DevRel to me is where, you know, there are a group of people that take
the culture and, you know, they just like try to spread it among the people.
And you know, like this is the, like when you go to a new city and visit, you know,
you pay attention to the architecture, to the culture, but you do that on purpose when
you're a tourist.
But DevEx is like this tourist guide for the company.
This is my take on it.
Cool.
Okay.
That's an interesting thing that would easily describe like what for the most part internal
DevRels do.
And I do agree with that definition.
It's interesting that you mentioned tourism and tourists because you recently had a sabbatical.
And can you tell us more about what a sabbatical is and how they work inside Automattic?
Yes.
So yeah, I started working professionally in 2010 and my first sabbatical was in 2011.